---
layout: post
title: The Commons vote on abortion clinics and constituency opinion
author: Chris Hanretty
excerpt: "There seems to be no strong link with constituency opinion in a recent Commons vote on abortion clinics."
---

On the 18th October, the House of Commons [voted on an amendment to
the Public Order
Bill](https://votes.parliament.uk/Votes/Commons/Division/1368). The
amendment -- [new clause 11](https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2022-10-18/debates/52B4111A-9C01-4FF0-A1CF-06721F589D61/PublicOrderBill#) -- provides for buffer zones surrounding
abortion clinics. In these zones (of 150 metres radius), protesters
may not interfere with individuals' access to abortion clinics. A
plurality of MPs voted in favour of the clause (295 to 110). All those
who voted against the clause came from either the Conservative Party
or the Democratic Unionist Party. The vote was not whipped, and so
members were free to vote on the basis of their views on protest or
their views on abortion.

How, if at all, did the vote relate to opinion in MPs' constituencies
on the issue of abortion? We can gain some understanding of
constituency views on abortion by looking at wave 16 of the [British
Election Study](https://www.britishelectionstudy.com/), which asked
respondents two questions about whether it was wrong or not wrong for
(i) a woman to have an abortion if there is a strong chance of serious
defect in the baby; and (ii) wrong or not wrong for a woman to have an
abortion if the family has a very low income and cannot afford any
more children? Respondents were asked to give a response on a
four-point scale, from (1), "not wrong at all", through (2) "wrong
only sometimes", (3) "almost always wrong", and (4) "always
wrong". The average of these two questions gives a measure of
individual opinion on abortion, where higher values indicate greater
opposition to abortion.

We can model these individual responses as a function of individual
respondent characteristics and constituency characteristics in order
to estimate average opinion in each constituency. This technique is
called [multilevel regression and
post-stratification](https://pure.royalholloway.ac.uk/portal/files/34198229/article.docx). The
mainland Great Britain constituency least opposed to abortion is
Brighton Pavilion, with a score of 1.44, or somewhere between "not
wrong at all" and "wrong only sometimes". The constituency most
opposed to abortion is Birmingham Perry Barr, with a score of 1.94,
very close to "wrong only sometimes". All constituencies therefore
fall on one side of the four point scale.

It might seem odd to ask how constituency opinion is reflected in a
free vote, when the essence of a free vote is that members should be
able to vote as their own conscience dictates, setting aside the party
whip. This would seem to imply that members should also be able to
vote without having regard to what their constituents think. However,
there have been free votes where there was a clear association between
constituency opinion and how MPs voted. This was, for example, the
case in the [2013 vote on same-sex
marriage](https://doi.org/10.1111/lsq.12148). These kinds of
associations can arise because MPs are, because of their initial
selection or because of who they are, already in step with their
constituents and do not need to be cajoled or incentivised to vote in
line with their wishes.

In the vote on new clause 11, however, there was no clear association
with constituency opinions and how MPs voted. When we look at all MPs
(without controlling for party), the association between
constituency-level opposition and voting in favour of New Clause 11 is
positive, such that areas which were (speaking relatively, not
absolutely) more opposed to abortion had MPs who voted in favour of
buffer zones.

<img href = "{{ site.url }}/{{ site.baseurl}}/images/2022-10-20-nc11_p1.png" width = "100%")

When we focus on the Conservative party -- the only party that was
divided on this issue -- we see a different pattern. Now the
association is in the expected direction: MPs from constituencies
which were more opposed to abortion were likely to vote in favour of
buffer zones. But we cannot be confident that this association is
different from zero. 

<img href = "{{ site.url }}/{{ site.baseurl}}/images/2022-10-20-nc11_p2.png" width = "100%")

In a logistic regression model of voting, the change in the
probability of voting for buffer zones given a move of 0.5 units (the
difference between Brighton Pavilion and Perry Barr) is about (minus)
twenty-three percentage points -- but it could be as low as -48
percentage points or as high as +21 percentage points. We just can't
be very confident about this association.

Given the weak association between constituency opinion and how
(Conservative) MPs voted on this issue, we might say either that NC11
"really was" about abortion, and that constituency attitudes on
abortion displayed no clear association with how MPs behaved, or that
NC11 "really was" about free speech, or at least was sufficiently
closely related to issues of free speech that testing for a link with
abortion opinions misrepresents the nature of the vote.

*Replication data and code for this analysis are at [https://gist.github.com/chrishanretty/b8edc1358a55c22871f0eb0a09d00be9](https://gist.github.com/chrishanretty/b8edc1358a55c22871f0eb0a09d00be9); the gist contains the raw data at the top which can be copy-pasted into a spreadsheet should you wish*
