---
layout: post
title: Why we may never know the full effects of voter ID
author: Democracy and Elections Centre team
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

In May's local elections, voters in England had to show photographic
ID before they could vote. This was the first time English voters (but
not the first time voters in the UK) have had to show photographic ID
to vote. Since not all people who have the right to vote have
photographic ID, it's natural to ask whether this new requirement had
an effect on the number of people who voted.

We can get a partial answer to this question by tallying up the number
of people who turned up to polling stations only to be [refused a
ballot](https://bylinetimes.com/2023/05/24/over-6000-people-in-england-denied-a-vote-as-exclusive-snapshot-of-photo-id-rollout-revealed/)
because they lacked qualifying ID. This is a partial answer because
there will be many people who lacked ID and didn't turn up to vote
because they (correctly) anticipated they would be turned away. We
therefore want to know what the *full* effect on turnout of the new
requirements is.

A number of us at the Democracy and Elections Centre recently tried to
answer this question by producing ward-level estimates of the
proportion of the voting eligible population (VEP) who lack a
passport, and the proportion of the VEP who lack a driving
licence. Since these were the two most common forms of identification
in the [voter ID pilots](https://www.electoralcommission.org.uk/who-we-are-and-what-we-do/our-views-and-research/our-research/voter-identification-pilots/may-2019-voter-identification-pilot-schemes/6-background-our-evaluation/pilot-areas-numbers), we can get a proxy for the proportion lacking
qualifying ID by multiplying (100% minus the proportion who lack a
passport) by (100% minus the proportion who lack a driving licence).

Here's a plot which shows the change in turnout between 2019 and 2023,
as a function of the estimated proportion who lacked qualifying ID.

![Changes in turnout, 2019 to 2023]({{ site.url }}/{{ site.baseurl}}/images/2023-05-26-cdid.png)

As you can see, the best fitting line slopes downwards: the more
people lacked qualifying ID, the more turnout dropped. More
specifically, for every percentage point increase in the proportion
lacking ID, turnout dropped by 0.25 percentage points.

Is this good evidence that the new requirements *caused* a drop in
turnout? Unfortunately not. The evidence shown in the figure can be
interpreted as causal if a ["parallel trends"] assumption holds -- if
areas with high and low proportions of people without ID were always
trending in the same way, even if they started from different points. 

One way of indirectly assessing the parallel trends assumption is to
conduct a placebo test -- to suppose that the new requirement had been
brought in a year earlier, and to run the same analysis on changes in
turnout between 2018 and 2022. Since (by assumption) high-ID and
low-ID areas share the same parallel trend, we shouldn't see any
association between the proportion lacking ID and the turnout in this
"placebo" contrast.

![Changes in turnout, 2018 to 2022]({{ site.url }}/{{ site.baseurl}}/images/2023-05-26-placebo.png)


Unfortunately, as the figure above shows, we fail our placebo
test. Areas with more people who lacked ID were already trending in
the direction of lower turnout. As far as we can tell, the
extraordinary Brexit-related events of 2017 to 2019 brought a lot of
people in to politics who are now turning off -- and lots of these
people lacked photo ID. 

The slope of this second line isn't as steep as before (0.13), and so one
could assume that the trend seen for 2018 to 2022 would have continued
for 2019 to 2023, meaning that a one percentage point increase in the
proportion lacking ID would cause a (0.25 - 0.15 = 0.1) percentage
point drop in turnout -- but that would be a bold assumption.

To some extent we know that voter ID reduces turnout because we see it
in the numbers of people turned away. But it's important to know the
full effects of voter ID. Sadly, in our case we had to agree with the
statistician John Tukey that "The combination of some data and an
aching desire for an answer does not ensure that a reasonable answer
can be extracted from a given body of data". It might be possible to
answer this question at a later date, and in particular to compare
turnout in 2026 local elections in England (which has a voter ID
requirement for local elections) and Wales (which does not). But for
now, we just don't know.

