---
title: "Voter ID and turnout in GE2024"
author: Democracy and Elections Centre team
layout: post
excert_separator: <!--more-->
---

Since the last General Election one of the most significant changes to
the UK election process has been the introduction of photo ID for
voters voting in-person. Although it was [piloted in 2018 and
2019](https://www.electoralcommission.org.uk/research-reports-and-data/pilot-evaluations/voter-identification-pilots)
and was first used in local elections from 2023, Thursday's general
election was the first time all would-be voters had to show ID.

<!--more-->

The UK is now aligned with [much of the voting
world](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00344893.2022.2113117)
on this aspect, but we may still expect there to be a negative impact
on turnout given the UK does not have a national ID card system like
France or Germany. Like with any new policy there are likely to be
teething troubles, such as the previous veterans minister (Johnny
Mercer) having to
[apologise](https://x.com/JohnnyMercerUK/status/1785959554582204864?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw%7Ctwcamp%5Etweetembed%7Ctwterm%5E1785959554582204864%7Ctwgr%5Ebb9ef3d7be74843f2de92a9b2c7ab578c9cb0850%7Ctwcon%5Es1_&ref_url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.forces.net%2Fmilitary-life%2Fveterans%2Fveterans-minister-apologises-new-veterans-card-not-legal-voting-id)
for veteran’s ID cards not being included, [Boris Johnson
forgetting](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-68947834) his proof
of identity, and one Presiding Officer having to ask uniformed police
officers to show another form of ID as their police IDs (which
understandably require a high level security clearance) were not
valid.

These examples all occurred at the 2024 May Local Elections. So, was
it all plain sailing at the General Election? Some anecdotes reveal
some of the challenges voters and administrators are dealing with. One
of us was told about a woman in Southeast London who was turned away
but returned after 2 minutes as she had found her Freedom Pass in the
bottom of her bag. We were also told about polling staff having to
double check that Iceland was part of the EEA as such ID cards are
valid. These incidents obviously slowed the process in these specific
cases but is there currently evidence that this voter ID is creating
widespread issues, and if so for who?

To investigate this, we produced two estimates of the proportion of
registered voters lacking qualifying photo ID for constituencies in
England and Wales. We produced one set of [estimates at ward
level](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1rHvPKuXuweuCoLqUZHpuQ44j3z7fwj6dmvSngP5n1bI/edit?gid=1642280546#gid=1642280546)
in May, and another set of estimates at the parliamentary constituency
level in June. The two estimates are correlated but there is not a
one-to-one correspondence. This may be due to reasons specific to how
voter ID operates in the UK. If voters do lack ID they can apply for a
Voter Authority Certificate, and some did so during the course of the
election campaign. After the election was called (22nd May) up until
the application deadline (26th June) [57,458 Voter Authority
Certificates](https://voter-authority-certificate.service.gov.uk/performance/applications_breakdown/with_dates?fromDay=22&fromMonth=05&fromYear=2024&toDay=26&toMonth=06&toYear=2024) were applied for. Voters without ID could also apply for
a postal vote or allow someone to act as their proxy.

We use these two sets of estimates to investigate the relationship
between those lacking ID and turnout in at the General Election. We
control for previous turnout to account for any overall change in
turnout.


![Changes in turnout, 2019 to 2024]({{ site.url }}/{{ site.baseurl}}/images/2024-07-09-cdid.png)


Whether we use the May or the June estimates, we see a statistically
significant negative relationship between the proportion lacking
qualifying ID and changes in turnout. Starting with the May estimates
(plotted in Figure (1(a)): each percentage point increase in the
proportion of registered voters who lack ID is associated with a 0.36
percentage point decrease in turnout. In the June estimates (plotted
in Figure (1(b)), the relationship is stronger: each percentage point
increase in the proportion of registered voters who lack ID is now
associated with a 0.49 percentage point increase. Although the
relationship is stronger in the June data, the difference in slopes is
not itself statistically significant. That is, whilst we can be
confident that the relationship is negative, we can’t be confident
that it’s “more negative” in June than in May.

Whilst these differences are statistically significant it still
remains to discuss if these differences are meaningful in a
substantive sense. In our May estimates the average proportion of
registered voters lacking qualifying ID was 4.5 percent. This means
that in the average constituency, we would expect turnout to be (4.3
times 0.36 =) 1.55 percentage points lower. If instead we use our June
estimates, the effect is lower. In our June estimates, the average
proportion of registered voters lacking qualifying ID was 2.8%, and so
the effect of the voter ID requirement is now to reduce turnout by
(2.8 times 0.49 =) 1.37 percentage points. These figures are
consistent with figures from [opinion
polls](https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article/2024/jul/08/voter-id-rule-may-have-stopped-400000-taking-part-in-uk-election-poll-suggests)
which suggest that around 1.6 percent of those who intended to vote
were unable to do so, although those figures include both individuals
who were *unable* to vote and individuals who, though able, did not
return after failing to show qualifying ID.

To put this in terms of number of voters, given that the average
constituency has an electorate of 70,000 we could expect between 960
and 1085 fewer voters because of the new ID requirement. Could such a
number make a difference to the overall electoral outcome? Given that
seven seats were decided by less than one hundred votes, it’s very
possible that voter ID affected the overall seat tally, if not the
size of the Labour majority.


We’ve shown an association between the proportion who lack ID and
changes in turnout, but this doesn’t mean that changes in ID
requirements caused falls in turnout. It might be that areas which
lacked ID were always going to see declines in turnout. This might be
because these areas were drawn in to voting during the previous 2019
election, as a result of the focus on Brexit. In [previous
work](https://hollodec.github.io/2023/05/26/voterid.html), we noted
that local election wards which lacked ID were already seeing turnout
fall between 2018 and 2022 before the introduction of the new ID
requirement. Our data is therefore helpful to identifying the effect
of voter ID requirements on turnout, but is not conclusive.

To contextualise these results, we can look at what type of
constituencies are more likely to have a higher proportion of those
lacking ID, using the May estimates. The table below shows key
demographics of the highest and lowest quartiles of constituencies
lacking ID compared with the average across all constituencies. As can
be seen, constituencies within the lowest quartile of ID ownership
tend to have a larger Asian, Disabled and C2/DE population than those
in the highest quartile. The opposite is true for the percentage of
retired and black residents, but these differences are not
substantively significant. The differences in the percentage of
students are minimal. Therefore, the potential negative effects of
lacking ID may be more strongly felt in different communities. This
reflects findings from the United States of America and comments made
by former MP Jacob Rees-Mogg.

|                      | % of retired residents | % of Asian residents | % of Black residents | % of students | % of disabled residents | % of C2DE Residents |
|----------------------|------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|---------------|-------------------------|---------------------|
| Lowest ID Ownership  | 21.42                  | 10.63                | 3.63                 | 5.75          | 19.45                   | 44.25               |
| Highest ID Ownership | 21.52                  | 7.96                 | 4.71                 | 5.5           | 15.34                   | 29.39               |
| All Constituencies   | 22.08                  | 8.5                  | 3.68                 | 5.48          | 17.65                   | 36.98               |

Table: Characteristics of areas with lowest and highest rates of possession qualifying ID. 

So far, we can conclude that turnout was lower in constituencies where
more people lacked valid ID, but whether this was due in full to the
change in law remains to be seen. We’ve focused on turnout, but other
outcomes also matter: a more restrictive ID law could affect also the
perceived and actual [integrity of elections](https://pure.royalholloway.ac.uk/en/publications/the-impact-of-voter-identification-laws-on-participation-and-perc).


